Who else thinks it's about time to get
all up in your feelings again? Well,
there are not many better ways to do
that than by curling up with a properly
passionate piece of cinema. So, let's
take a look at 10 of the most romantic
movies of all time.
A good romance can be a defining part of
anybody's life. They can be short-lived
and burned bright or slow simmering and
unrequited. They can offer solace,
heartbreak, pure joy, and anything in
between, all in equal measure, and
sometimes in a confusing order. So,
let's try to chart a course through our
own love affair with movies. taking the
evolving shape of a relationship's life
cycle and looking at 10 of the ways
movies reflect our own romances.
Starting at the beginning,
ah, first loves. Nothing finer, more
wondrous, and innocent than those
original pangs of love beating in one's
chest. It doesn't matter where these
films highlighting the mostly youthful
adventures into the heart wind up. The
point is they remind us of what it was
like to feel those feelings for the
first time.
>> You choo choo choose me.
>> These are the loves that all subsequent
loves are measured against. Call Me By
Your Name is all gorgeous Italian sun
and pushing at one's own edges to figure
out who they are with one of the best
speeches about heartbreak ever put to
film. There's the umbrellas of
Sherborg's pastel musical version of a
young love tested through time and
circumstance. There's the violent
version in Bonnie and Clyde in Bad
Lands, the growing up too fast version
in An Education, the extremely dark
version in The Virgin Suicides, and the
winter romance version in The Bridges of
Madison County, which I wholeheartedly
believe is a first love movie, but none
of those are quite the point. While
Romeo and Juliet is and perhaps always
will be the one story that covers all
the first love bases, even in the
fantastic Ghost Light, which is a
version of the bard's work from the
viewpoint of the young lover's grieving
parents. We think that Wes Anderson was
really on to something with Moonrise
Kingdom.
>> I always wish I was an orphan. Most my
favorite characters are. I think your
lives are more special.
I love you, but you don't know what
you're talking about.
>> I love you, too.
>> In its simplest terms, Moonrise Kingdom
is about two kids on a remote island who
fall in love over the course of
consecutive summers and the adventure
they undertake in their attempts to run
away together. It's a story that anybody
could tell. Wes Anderson, however, is
one of the most distinctive directors
working, and the look and feel and
texture of his films is a defining
characteristic of his work. Sometimes it
feels like an affectation for the sake
of it. But with Moonrise Kingdom, and
for our purposes here on this list, the
postured formality of his storytelling
makes for an incredible first love
story. The film is presented like a
memory with a narrator organizing the
story with minimal context, presenting
the setting like it's a myth with
location names like Summer's End making
Sam's journey into a pint-sized odyssey
to get to Suzie. And a first love should
have that kind of outsized importance.
And the way the entire island drops what
they're doing because of the
ramifications of Sam and Suz's love is
perfect. If a first love is the one that
lingers, the one you never truly forget
or get over, then it should live in this
sort of gauzy fantastic memory. Telling
it like a fairy tale is the perfect
format. And Moonrise Kingdom is the
perfect marriage of filmmaker and
subject for a first love story.
Once we've achieved first love status,
being part of a feelgood story has to be
the point moving forward, doesn't it? We
obviously want these feelings to last
and at minimum cinema has always felt
good about a happily ever after ending.
The world champion of everything works
out in the end genres is of course the
romantic comedy. Old reliable classic
screw ball romcoms like Some Like It Hot
and Philadelphia Story and Pillow Talk
laid the groundwork for less old but
classics nonetheless like When Harry Met
Sally, Pretty Woman, and Sleepless in
Seattle. Although, if I didn't balance
this rule of three list quite right,
You've Got Mail works better as a
companion to Pillow Talk, even if it's
the the lesser Tom Hanks Me Ryan outing.
But what are the other feel-good
categories out there? Dirty Dancing is a
doubly nostalgic romance made in the 80s
and set in the '60s. There are quirkier
romances on offer with punch trunk love
and its two matching lonely hearts. City
Lights is an all-timer made just after
the onset of Takis, but produced silent
nonetheless that finds Charlie Chaplan's
[__] in a whirlwind of farically
delightful near misses. But for our
number nine, let's start with a modern
feel-good romance clearly inspired by
the golden age of the [__] and the
distant future of Wall-E.
>> Name
Wallally.
Wall-E.
>> Eve
Eve
Eve.
>> Wall-E is so many things. A Pixar
computer animation masterpiece, a
cautionary piece of science fiction. But
as far as we're concerned, beyond
anything else, Wall-E is a romance. A
warm, funny, and tender look at love in
robots that reflects even more about us.
Not only in actual relationships, but
with how we like to model them after
what we've seen on screen. At this
point, culturally, what we know of
romance is squarely in the art imitating
life, imitating art, or a Boros. That
Wall-E himself is no different adds to
his charm immeasurably. If indeed we
want to feel good about romance,
watching feel-good stories on screen,
portraying a robot learning how to love
by watching romantic comedies is more
than just a clever meta reference. It's
a crucial and brilliant storytelling
technique that allows any of us here in
the 21st century to empathize with that
adorable little trash man. Beyond all of
this, however, the romance between
Wall-E and Eve literally saves humanity.
How's that for stakes in a romcom?
Once love has been established, there's
another important step in any
relationship. Figuring out what kind of
couple you are. Movies offer us plenty
of pairs that fit perfectly together and
only have an obstacle or two in their
way, but I don't think that's what we
really want to see on screen. Instead,
give me the mismatched duo that needs a
proper effort to make it work. Give me
the always entertaining odd couple. It's
something of a necessity in nearly every
stock romance. an element of when are
these two crazy kids going to meet in
the middle? But we've got a rich
tradition of romantic movies where the
oddness in the coupling is not a hurdle,
but the point. The graduate summer fling
between a kid and his older family
friend highlights the difference between
starting out and settled down. There's
Edward Scissor Hands's surreal satire
springing from an unlikely romance, or
Harold and Ma's entire generation
spanning age difference, which is truly
one of our favorite on-screen pairings.
But what about couples with very real
hurdles standing in their way? Lars and
the Real Girls Girl is not a real girl
at all, but a stirring romance
nonetheless. Her features a love affair
between a man and an operating system
that's as bittersweet as they come.
While our number eight pick is the
charming romance between a widow and the
spirit of a sea captain, the ghost and
Mrs. Mureer.
>> What have you done with me, monkey
puzzle tree?
>> I expected to chop the firewood by now.
Hang it all, madam. I I planted that
tree with my own two hands.
>> Why?
>> Because I WANTED A MONKEY PUZZLE TREE IN
ME GARDEN.
>> THINK HOW MUCH PRETTIER a bed of roses
will look there.
>> I hate roses. I hope the whole blasted
bed dies of blight.
>> I wish you wouldn't swear. It's so ugly.
>> If you think that's ugly, it's a good
thing you can't read me thoughts.
>> The Ghost of Mrs. Mure is one of the
more romantic hauntings ever put to
film. There is admittedly a campiness to
the proceedings, a sappiness from that
era of filmmaker that remains part of
its charm and one of the chief reasons
I'm highlighting it here. I just want a
little of that classic Hollywood glamour
in the mix. Gene Tierney plays a young
widow moving from London to a seaside
cottage inhabited by the crusty spectre
of Rex Harrison's old captain. The
gruff, salty dog stands in as stark a
contrast to the mannered and headstrong
Londoner as the shadowy black and white
photography. But while the pairing may
seem familiar, it's deployed in such a
savvy way here. Lucy Mure's
determination to make her own life after
the death of her husband runs headlong
into a literal ghost standing in for the
past and future challenges of a widowed
woman in turn of the century London
society. The seaside moodiness settled
over every frame leans hard into the
gothic romance at play. But as our
supernatural odd couple navigate
jealousy, heartbreak, and the simple
fact that they can't touch each other,
The Ghost and Mrs. Mure offers a
romcom's pluckucky sweetness underneath
it all, making them an odd couple worth
aspiring towards.
While we're on the topic of couples in
romantic films, we'd be remiss to not
spend a pick on the couples that aren't
actually couples. After all, for us here
at Cinnaphix, anyway, friendship is just
as important as romantic love. So, here
we look to the realm of platonic love,
where a couple are not lovers, but
romantic just the same.
>> Oh, I'm Jay. This is my head with life
made s Bob.
>> Buddy cop movies get a special shout
here, especially the ones as homoerotic
as Tango and Cash. Bridesmaids test the
connection of two lifelong friends,
while Swingers sees a friendship stand
in for more of a marriage than anything
else. The Banshees of Iniran counts here
on this list as a breakup movie of
sorts, while Silence of the Lamb's
Clarice gets the kind of personal and
professional fulfillment from Hannibal
Lectar that she's missing in the rest of
her life. But for the most romantic not
a couple, we're going with Sophia
Copala's lonely stay in Tokyo, lost in
translation.
>> Does it get easier?
>> No.
Yes,
it gets easier.
Oh. Yeah. Look at you.
>> Thanks.
And the more you know who you are and
what you want,
the less you let
things upset you.
I'm not sure there's a read of this
movie that clearly says Bill Murray and
Scarlett Johansson's unmed and
disconnected people ever would have been
romantically involved. But the love and
care that deepens between them
throughout the film's runtime is
undeniable. Lost in Translation is a
testament to the surprise of sudden
connection. The wonder of finding
someone who's going through the same
thing you are when on the surface their
circumstances are pretty wildly
different. And what better place to
explore that idea than a foreign land
where jet lag and a language barrier
keep you up and your dreamlike
adventures each night come with the
clarity that they will not last forever,
but will change you for the better
nonetheless. The movie's climactic and
now iconic whispered ending is brilliant
for a handful of reasons, but for our
purposes on this list, we'll talk about
the blank slateness of it. What would
you say to somebody with whom you've
shared a moment this important in your
life? It's the romantic version of
Keeping the Shark underwater and Jaws.
Whatever dialogue anybody could have
written for that moment can't possibly
be as good as what you, the viewer, can
imagine.
What's great and sometimes terrible
about love is that even when it doesn't
work out, it sticks around long enough
to leave the door open for a second
chance. Fighting for them, discovering
who is worthy of one, or just trying to
make one work are all worthy enough
endeavors to build a movie around. His
Girl Friday finds a newspaper man trying
to get his wife back from her new
husband. There's a melodramatic May
December version of an older woman's
second chance at love in general in All
That Heaven Allows. There's also the
second chance happening concurrently in
a parallel universe of sorts and sliding
doors. Past lives is a brilliant look at
whether any relationship is itself a
second chance on one in a previous life,
ending with the question of getting a
second chance in the next. One of my
personal favorites is The Apartment,
where The Second Chance works as a motif
in nearly every aspect of the film,
while Jack Lemon and Shirley Mlan put in
all-time great work throughout playing
the longing and pain and ultimately
happiness inherent in a second chance
story. If we're crowning a champion of
second chance movies, though, there
aren't many who could argue against
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind.
Michelle Gandre's trippy romance about
erasing the memory of a relationship
oddly gives Jim Carrey and Kate
Winslett's couple an adorable second
chance at a first chance. Meanwhile,
Blue J is kind of the complete opposite,
following a couple getting a messy and
difficult second chance to connect. But
there's a second chance film that
doesn't get enough play from a subgenre
that was thriving way back in the9s when
my own romance with movies was heating
up and gross point blank.
>> You do it because you were trained to do
it. you were encouraged to do it and
ultimately, you know, you
get to like it.
I know that sounds bad.
>> You're a psychopath.
>> No, no, no. Psychopath kills for no
reason. I kill for money. It's a job.
That didn't sound right.
>> The hitman comedy genre was pretty big
in the '9s, but none quite hit the
heights of Gross Point Blank. John
Cusack's Martin Blank samples the entire
array of second chances in a return trip
home as a professional killer attending
his high school reunion. It's funny,
infinitely quotable, and has one of the
best Alan Ark and supporting roles of
all time. But what earns Gross Point
Blank a spot on this list is Martin's
relationship with many drivers Debbie,
the woman he stood up on prom night.
Their romance is about forgiveness and
honesty and all the things any second
chance story needs. The film sets itself
apart from the herd, however, by the
need to get yourself figured out. Martin
doesn't get a free pass. He's held
accountable for everything he's done. In
their relationship, at least, he's still
killed a lot of people as a thriving and
successful hitman for years. But there's
also no real happy ending, just a sense
that they're both continuing to work on
things, both with themselves and with
their romance. And as far as second
chances are concerned, that's really all
you can ask for.
Hitting our halfway mark here with
number five. We have to look at those
romances that turn out to be unhealthy.
Not all relationships exist for the best
reasons and obsession, jealousy,
enablement, and countless other
difficulties have had their moments on
the silver screen. Phantom Thread is a
favorite of mine here with Reynolds
Woodcock making himself literally
unhealthy in the name of romance, but
that misses my point a little bit here.
Vertigo is a look at a sort of romantic
mania as Jimmy Stewart's Scotty molds
Kim Novak's Meline into the image of his
own trauma. All About Eve probably works
here too, following a manipulative young
actor with a hint of our number seven
category in the recipe as well. Days of
Heaven's central romance is built on
manipulation and lies as well. While Sid
and Nancy charts the real life course of
a self-destructive punk rock romance,
and the romance blossoming in A Star Is
Born is an unhealthy story no matter
what generation remakes the movie. But
while we're swimming in the murky end of
the pool, let's really revel in it with
a movie that does a little bit of
everything we've talked about so far
with a dash of immortality and let the
right one in
Oscar
There is a very transactional nature to
the relationship between the bullied
young Oscar and his new neighbor, the
vampire Ellie. But in the midst of all
the bloodshed and blood leaking, there's
a sweetness to it as well. More than
that, it's a portrait of two outcast
kids who find each other. The loneliness
each of them endure makes them a match,
and what they need from the other fits
together like a morbid puzzle. What's
brilliant about the film, though, is the
moodiness of a cold Swedish landscape,
the brutality of Oscars' tormentors, the
tinges of darkness around nearly every
character we meet, all blend together to
create a world where you can't help but
root for these kids or this kid and this
vampire, I guess, is more accurate. But
there's nothing good that will ever come
out of this coupling. only more blood
and death. That they've got as good a
chance as any couple we've mentioned in
this list to live a long life together
makes the film undeniably romantic in a
bit of an unhealthy way.
Well, [__] guys. We've opened the door
to negative thoughts in our exercise to
build a romance Frankenstein style.
Should I even keep doing this? Would I
have been better off not starting this
romance in the first place? Maybe it's
time we look at the romantic films where
things don't work out. After all, as
soaring and wonderful as a romance can
be, what happens when the lovers don't
end up together? This is perhaps most
famously pulled off on a hill of beans
in Casablanca. There are non-life
ordeath consequence versions of
feel-good romances and the way they're
never quite right for each other in 500
days of summer or the mutually exclusive
Dreams to Chase in La La Land. Queer
cinema has perhaps more than its share
of films that qualify here like the
brief and doomed from the start love
affairs and Portrait of a Lady on Fire,
Carol, Brokeback Mountain. Van Vender's
Wings of Desire even takes a tragic
ending to a love story into heavenly
territory with an angel giving up his
immortality in the name of romance.
While atonement disguises itself as a
happy ending for a minute, but really
there's nothing but feel bad vibes by
the end. Wong car wise in the mood for
love is one of the greatest studies of a
tragic nearm miss romance of all time.
Brilliantly and gorgeously rendered with
a sumptuous color palette. The tortured
relationship of two people whose spouses
have abandoned their vows but they
themselves do not in spite of a genuine
love forming between them is
heartbreaking right up to the credit
role. But there's a film that every one
of these honorable mentions even Wong
Car owes a debt to. David Lean's brief
encounter.
>> You know what's happened, don't you?
>> Yes.
Yes, I do.
>> I've fallen in love with you.
>> Yes, I know.
>> Before he did Lawrence of Arabia and Dr.
Javago and the bridge on the river Quai.
David Lean concerned himself with
something just as epic, if on a smaller
scale. Brief encounter follows two
married couple connecting over a simple
piece of grit stuck in an eye. The
chance meeting blossoms into a
flirtatious rendevu before becoming a
forbidden love. And all the while, the
anguish of knowing everything they're
feeling is an impossible fantasy is
lurking beneath the surface. But there's
an everydayness to the proceedings as
well. There's nothing glamorous about
the pair, and the slow, almost casual
pace that their good-natured laughing
turns to tortured longing feels
universal. The obvious, strong emotions
are kept at bay. It's the shame and the
fear dictating their actions, not their
hearts and desires. Neither of the
participants seems particularly unhappy,
nor are they caught in dire
circumstances from which they deserve to
escape. They don't even seem bored or
trapped by mundanity. What's on display
in Brief Encounter is the sudden spark
of romance in the wrong time and place.
A tragedy photographed in gorgeous black
and white through the romantic steam of
a railway station.
As we wind down with our last few picks
and away from brief encounters, grueling
almost affair, it's time to put
Tennyson's quote to the test. Is it
better to have loved and lost than never
to have loved at all? Romance doesn't
always work out, and we can't just look
at the happy endings if we're aiming for
cinema's definitive studies of the
subject. As such, a good movie about
falling out of love is a necessary
addition. Ingmar Bergman made the
foremost epic on the topic with scenes
from a marriage. Blue Valentine charts
the downward trajectory of a
relationship, while Revolutionary Road
does the same with suburban life in the
40s and 50s. and Eyes Wide Shut puts a
marriage and the entire idea of fidelity
to the test with ambiguous results.
Marriage Story and Kramer versus Kramer
center their crumbling relationships
around custody disputes, but it's hard
to argue that anybody ever did it better
than Mike Nichols, Richard Burton, and
Elizabeth Taylor in Who's Afraid of
Virginia Wolf.
>> Hey, I'll give you mommy a big sloppy
kiss.
>> I want a big sloppy kiss. I don't want
to kiss you right now, Martha.
>> Where are these people you invited over?
Where is this goodlooking, well-built
young man and his slim, hipped wife?
>> Stay on to talk to daddy. They'll be
here.
>> Why didn't you want to kiss me,
>> George?
taking place over the course of one very
long night in which veteran drinkers
George and Martha welcome young
professor Nick and his wife Honey into
their home. The ensuing emotional
warfare has been famous since Edward
Alb's play debuted. But what I love
about it, particularly for this
category, are the stakes risen to
incalculable heights. What is romance if
not us at our biggest, our most
passionate, with our most sharpened and
vulnerable edges on display? The show
that George and Martha put on for their
younger counterparts, the games they
play, and the links they're willing to
go to hurt each other, there are intense
levels of passion evident in the torment
they inflict. As the younger couple
bears witness to the long simmering
anger, they begin to fall victim to it
as well. Seeing their own seems split
under the weight of it, it is of course
revealed that George and Martha have
their reasons, but outwardly they
project a complete lack of love,
representing the total absence of it.
For Nick and Honey, being confronted by
all the things they're missing out on by
not being in a great romance makes for a
difficult lesson to learn and a
fascinating juosition to watch.
Well, now that we're well and truly out
of love, the next step is adding another
name to our list of exes.
Jeez, how romantic is this top 10
romantic movies list getting? Right?
Breakups, as I said, are part of the
life cycle of a romance, as much as
falling head over heels, and a ton of
great movies have been built on a
premise involving an exartner.
Highfidelity is a dramdy examination of
an entire list of exes, ranking them in
a way that feels relatable enough to us
for some reason. But this version of
John Cusack belongs in the second
chances category about as much as the
previously discussed Hitman version. The
invitation's horror is set up by having
to face a former relationship as is the
invisible man using a bad relationship
as the monster from which escape proves
difficult. And even though Mrs. Dowfire
qualifies here and probably deserves a
mention, I like the vein of horror we've
stumbled onto here and will instead
shout out Midsomar as you know one way
to break up with somebody as I
transition into my number two pick and
some good old-fashioned French murder
mystery Diab.
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
The story of a woman getting rid of an
archetypally terrible husband by
conspiring with his mistress is
outstanding thriller material on its
own. Henri George Cluso's followup to
Wages of Fear ratchets up guilt right
alongside the tension, charting the
dissolution of a marriage in ways as
violent and nerve-wracking as driving
nitroglycerin through the jungle. But
the interesting thing about Diabolic,
where its inclusion on this list of
romantic movies is concerned, is how it
approaches the idea of getting out of a
bad relationship. The plot twists and
turns, as a good thriller should, but
the revelations begin to make the movie
about a nasty breakup. Christina and
Michelle's marriage is by all accounts
an awful one, made that way pretty
exclusively by Michelle's complete
shittiness. But in spite of his obvious
villain, Diabolik eventually tells us
that ending a relationship can often
hurt everybody involved, not least of
which the half that doesn't deserve it.
That it's telling us that using murder,
poisons, and manipulations is the
thriller icing to a breakup movie cake.
It's a great example of why some movies
are talked about for decades while
others are not. Were it just a capable
thriller, it would be fun enough.
Diabelique, however, is a thriller that
can be interpreted on any number of
layers, including and I think especially
as an entry in the Bad Romanc's Hall of
Fame.
Here we are at number one, and it's time
to go big before we go home. We veered
for perhaps too long into the bad side
of romance, so let's wrap things up with
movies about love itself. These are
stories where neither the sweeping scale
nor years that pass can rend the
relentless and unbreakable bonds of true
unconquerable love. These are the epic
love stories. David Lean's gotten a
shout out here already with one of the
all-time greats in Dr. Jivago. While Joe
Wright's Anna Corinina is an admirable
successor in the sweeping Russian
romance genre, The Princess Bride is all
about the swashbuckling fairy tale
aspect of eternal romance. Titanic has
sheer historical scale, and while the
gift of Jack's love for Rose endured,
Jack did not. Bram Stoker's Dracula is a
love story that spans lifetimes. The
Before Trilogy is the more grounded
version, spanning part of a single
lifetime, but covering a lot of the same
bases. The Notebook naturally gets more
than a passing mention here as a
universally heartbreaking cinematic
experience that's epic, if only for its
place in pop culture history. But the
epic love story that gets me every time
is Darren Areronowski's The Fountain.
>> I asked Le
>> if I could be buried at our farm.
>> No, stop it.
>> I want you to be with me.
>> I am with you. Look,
I'll always be with you.
I promise.
Literally taking place over a thousand
years, the search for eternal life
consumes a man in his quest to never
lose his love. Gorgeously realized with
visual motifs connecting Tomas, a
kistador in 1500, Tommy, a medical
researcher in 2000, and Tom the lonely
astronaut in 2500 that proves you do not
need AI to bring different time periods
to life. Darren, the fountain deals with
love's role in human nature as something
that never changes. We have always been
and will always be both terrified of
death and completely dependent on love.
And the quest to conquer both of those
instincts is at the center of this film.
Tomas, Tommy, and Tom destroy
themselves, searching for a way to give
Isabella and Izzy the gift of eternal
devoted love, making it one of the most
epic romantic movies of all time.
Hell yeah, I wrote another one. Well,
those are our picks for the top 10 most
romantic movies of all time. Got one in
there about a vampire. That's fun,
right? Couple mentions about vampires,
too. Let me know in the comments how
many of your favorite romantic movies
made the list, or how many of my picks
made it weirdly and painfully obvious
where my head's at these days. But more
than anything, be sure to subscribe to
IGN and Cynics for more movie lists.